MAT 301 Inventory Project

Maggie Barker, Amy Lan

We are using mathematical modeling techniques to determine how much gasoline should be delivered to a chain of gasoline stations, and how often deliveries should take place, in order to minimize cost and satisfy demand. In this model, we assume that the only sources of cost are delivery and storage, that the storage cost is proportional to the amount of gasoline stored, and that the delivery cost is constant per delivery.

We use a probabilistic submodel to approximate the daily demand. Using historical data of a particular gas station, we create a frequency table of the number of gallons demanded. From this table, we find the probability of each demand level, and build a cumulative probability table. We graph the cumulative probability histogram and approximate the cumulative probabilities with points, and then create a demand curve using cubic spline interpolation. Then we use the Monte Carlo process to simulate daily demand at a gas station.

We then use an algorithm to simulate the daily inventory of a gas station. This algorithm accounts for periodic deliveries of gasoline, with the same time period and quantity for each delivery. We tally the cost of delivery and storage to calculate the average daily cost. To prevent running out of gas (unfilled demands), we keep track of the number of days that our inventory runs out, and the number of gallons of unfilled demands.

We apply a range of delivery quantities and periods to simulate the average daily cost for each combination of delivery parameters. As we have two independent variables (delivery quantity and time between deliveries) and one dependent variable (average daily cost), we create a multivariable function, and we plot a 3D surface to investigate the effect of delivery parameters on cost. Our goal is to find the minimum value of this function.

Since we assume the only sources of cost are from delivery and storage, we can reason that a low cost would be achieved by buying a small amount of gas and waiting a long time between deliveries. Our minimum cost could be achieved by never having any gas delivered, which would obviously not be conducive to a successful business operation. In fact, we would prefer to never run out of gas and be able to fulfill all demands. On the other hand, we don’t want to buy too much gasoline, or buy it too frequently, which would drive up either storage or delivery costs, or both. We would prefer a “happy medium” where we buy just enough gas to fulfill demands. So in our model, we thus modify our cost surface to cut away those combinations of quantity and frequency that result in unfilled demands. Then we find the minimum point on this new cut surface. This minimum point gives us what we are looking for: The quantity of gas to have delivered, and the frequency of delivery, that will result in minimum cost and ensure that all of our demands are fulfilled.

As there is some randomness involved in the Monte Carlo process used in our simulation, our results are slightly different each time we run the simulation. We run the simulation many times and find the mean and standard deviation of our results. We then plot a histogram of our minimum costs to investigate the statistical distribution of our outcome.
